Add new guide for using Vega-Lite in Wildcard widget (#26665)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/dashboards/guide/using_vega_lite_in_wildcard_widgets.md

## Context menu and context links

With Datadog widgets, you have the ability to click on a graph datapoint to open a [graph context menu][8] with context links. You can enable this feature on Wildcard widgets by adding specific parameters to your widget's configuration.

To enable the context menu feature, include the following parameters in your Vega-Lite configuration:

```
"params": [
  {
    "name": "datadogPointSelection",
    "select": "point"
  }
]
```

After you enable this feature you can click on datapoints in the widget to open a context menu. Use the graph context menu with the context links of the graph editor. Context links bridge dashboard widgets with other pages in Datadog, as well as the third-party applications you have integrated into your workflows. For more information, see [Context Links][9].

You can also add dynamic custom links through the [`href` encoding][10]. This is useful if you do not need a full context menu of choices.

## Further reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

> [1]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/metrics/units/#unit-list
> [2]: https://d3js.org/d3-format#locale_format
> [3]: https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/expressions/
> [4]: https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/data.html#named
> [5]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/widgets/wildcard/#map-datadog-data-to-vega-lite-specifications
> [6]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/widgets/wildcard/#data-preview
> [7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/tagging/#define-tags
> [8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/widgets/#graph-menu
> [9]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/guide/context-links/#context-links-variables
> [10]: https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/encoding.html

Author: ```suggestion
[1]: /metrics/units/#unit-list
[2]: https://d3js.org/d3-format#locale_format
[3]: https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/expressions/
[4]: https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/data.html#named
[5]: /dashboards/widgets/wildcard/#map-datadog-data-to-vega-lite-specifications
[6]: /dashboards/widgets/wildcard/#data-preview
[7]: /getting_started/tagging/#define-tags
[8]: /dashboards/widgets/#graph-menu
[9]: /dashboards/guide/context-links/#context-links-variables
[10]: https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/encoding.html
[11]: /dashboards/widgets/wildcard/#compatible-data-formats
```

further_reading:
- link: "https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/widgets/wildcard/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about the Wildcard widget"
- link: "https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/guide/widget_colors/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Selecting the right colors for your graphs"
- link: "https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/guide/context-links/#context-links-variables"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Using Context Links in Dashboards"
---

## Overview

When using Vega-Lite with Wildcard widgets in Datadog, you'll find extensions to the Vega-Lite specification which are unique to Datadog. This guide outlines the necessary configurations and considerations for effectively using Vega-Lite for data visualization in Datadog, ensuring compatibility with its unique specifications. By understanding and leveraging these specifications, you can create visually appealing and interactive data visualizations that are both effective and responsive to your thematic preferences.

**Note**: Some extensions in Vega-Lite are exclusive to Datadog and might not function in the same way if exported to other tools that have Vega-lite.

> ## Customizing the theming and Color Palettes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Customizing the theming and color palettes
```
Not sure if this should follow sentence case here?

Datadog provides a range of theming and color palette options to enhance the visual appeal of widgets. You can specify custom colors so that they blend in with the styling choices used by native Datadog widgets. If you set custom colors, the graph will not adjust colors when the app theme changes. By default, Datadog graphs adjust colors for text and axis marks to ensure readable contrast when viewed in dark mode. It's best to avoid setting custom colors for graph axes.

Customized color, font, spacing, and other design settings are available. These settings apply automatically when using the theme switcher (`CTRL + OPT + D`).

### Custom color palette

While you can create custom color palettes using hex codes, using the Datadog color palette ensures automated switching between light and dark modes.

Datadog offers additional color palettes beyond the public Vega color schemes, including:  
- `dog_classic_area`  
- `datadog16`  
- `hostmap_blues`

{{< whatsnext desc="Additional resources:" >}}
    {{< nextlink href="/dashboards/guide/widget_colors/" >}}Learn more about Datadog color schemes and themes{{< /nextlink >}}

>     {{< nextlink href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/dashboards/guide/widget_colors/" >}}See Vega color schemes{{< /nextlink >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< nextlink href="/dashboards/guide/widget_colors/" >}}See Vega color schemes{{< /nextlink >}}
```
are both these links supposed to be the same?

Author: Nope, great catch! I updated your suggestion to reflect the correct link.

{{< /whatsnext >}}

## Customize visualization units

> Datadog offers unit-aware number formatting for [over 150 units][1], enabling you to easily format values such as 3600 (seconds) as 1 (hour). To use this feature in your Vega-Lite definition, add the `"config": {"customFormatTypes": true}` parameter to the root of your JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog offers unit-aware number formatting for [over 150 units][1], enabling you to easily format values such as 3600 (seconds) as 1 (hour). To use this feature in your Vega-Lite definition, add the `"config": {"customFormatTypes": true}` parameter to the root of your JSON block.
```

> Then, in any place where you set a `format` key, set `formatType: hoverFormatter` and define your units as an array.  For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, wherever you set a `format` key, use `formatType: hoverFormatter` and define your units as an array.  For example:
```

        },
        "y": {"aggregate": "count"}
    }
}
{{< /highlight >}}

{{% /collapse-content %}} 

## Referencing Datadog Data in Vega-Lite

In Datadog, each "request" or query corresponds to a Vega [named data source][4]. The numbering for these sources starts at one. This means if your widget makes multiple requests, it generates corresponding datasets named `table1`, `table2`, and so forth.

{{< img src="/dashboards/guide/using_vega_lite_in_wildcard_widgets/wildcard_multiple_requests.png" alt="Example wildcard widget with multiple requests" style="width:100%;" >}}

Whenever possible, Datadog widgets preserve tag names from your request's "group by" field. For formula and function requests, such as Scalar or Timeseries, "Formula Aliases" are used as field names. For an example, see the [Wildcard widget][5] documentation.

### Additional Field Information

- Timeseries requests include a `_time` field for timestamps in milliseconds.  
- Histogram request rows consist of three fields: `start`, `end`, and `count`.  
- List request responses vary by data source. Use the [DataPreview][6] to determine available fields.

### Field names with special characters

> Special considerations apply to field names that contain non-alphanumeric characters. Datadog Metrics tags [prohibit most non-alphanumeric characters][7]. However, not all products have this constraint and they allow characters in attribute names that may have dual meanings in Vega-Lite. These characters include square brackets `[]` and periods `.` used to access nested properties in object-shaped data, but need to be escaped because the backend flattens the data before returning it to you for /scalar and /timeseries data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special considerations apply to field names that contain non-alphanumeric characters. Datadog Metrics tags [prohibit most non-alphanumeric characters][7]. However, not all products have this constraint and they allow characters in attribute names that may have dual meanings in Vega-Lite. These characters include square brackets `[]` and periods `.` which are used to access nested properties in object-shaped data. They need to be escaped because the backend flattens the data before returning it to you for /scalar and /timeseries data. 
```
I thought it looked weird reading the `.` so added a bit for just readability and then separated this to two sentences.

To ensure these characters are interpreted correctly by the Wildcard widget, you must escape these characters with `\\`. For example, when using the RUM query field `@view.name`, write it as `@view\\.name` in the Vega-Lite specification.

For more information on supported data formats, see the [Wildcard widget][11] documentation.

## Context menu and context links

With Datadog widgets, you have the ability to click on a graph datapoint to open a [graph context menu][8] with context links. You can enable this feature on Wildcard widgets by adding specific parameters to your widget's configuration.

To enable the context menu feature, include the following parameters in your Vega-Lite configuration:

```
"params": [
  {
    "name": "datadogPointSelection",
    "select": "point"
  }
]
```

> After you enable this feature you can click on datapoints in the widget to open a context menu. Use the graph context menu with the context links of the graph editor. Context links bridge dashboard widgets with other pages in Datadog, as well as the third-party applications you have integrated into your workflows. For more information, see [Context Links][9].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you enable this feature, you can click on datapoints in the widget to open a context menu. Use the graph context menu with the context links of the graph editor. Context links bridge dashboard widgets with other pages in Datadog, as well as the third-party applications you have integrated into your workflows. For more information, see [Context Links][9].
```
